[MUSIC PLAYING]
Where in the Python 001 did you start building the objects?
And where did the objects come first, and then a syntax came?
Or did you build a syntax, and then the objects?
I think in my head, I had both.
Because I was building a stripped down version of ABC.
And I was very familiar with how ABC implemented
its data structures.
And I had pretty well-developed ideas
about how I would do it instead of the ABC way,
both for the syntax and for the data structures.
So for the syntax, actually, my main gripe about ABC
was that it used uppercase letters for the keywords
of the language.
They had a reason for that, but I
didn't think it was a good reason.
And it just looked horrible to a Unix hacker like myself.
So that's what I wanted to change for the syntax.
But I knew that I wanted to do the indentation.
And I had already participated in the parser for ABC,
so I knew how to do that stuff.
I had some of my own ideas, but I knew what I wanted.
I literally actually started with a parser.
And actually, I started with a lexer and a parser.
Those were actually the first bits of the language
that I wrote.
But before I started, I knew I had very specific ideas
on how the primitive data types would be implemented.
I would use the same reference count mechanism
that I knew well from ABC.
I would implement integers in a similar way,
because I wanted--
Integers would be an easy choice not to put in the object.
Yeah, I wanted everything to be an object.
That was also a thing I approved of about ABC.
And I think I have to take it back
about the arbitrary precision integers.
Those came quickly, but I don't think
that they came immediately.
There was an integer type, which was 32 bits.
There was a separate long type, which
survived until the end of Python 2,
which was arbitrary precision.
And there was a flow type.
Then for the more complex data structures--
and the numeric types were not all that different
or interesting, not that different from ABC.
But for the rest, I sort of had seen
what ABC did, which was that everything was implemented
as a tree, even strings.
And I did not like that, because I
wanted to interface with system calls and C libraries.
And I said, I want strings to be arbitrary length,
but I want them to be a linear buffer.
And so too bad if one string sort of requires
allocating a large buffer at once.
Most strings aren't that long.
I'll make sure that it works for any size.
But I'll optimize for the short strings that
are the bread and butter of so many programs
I imagine would be written in Python.
That is a brilliant choice, but not automatic or intuitive,
that that would be the right answer.
Having sort of written a lot of C code
and knowing that I wanted Python to be extensible with C,
that was also one of the very early choices.
I wanted to sort of link back to C code in a natural way.
So the import system was part of that.
So when Python was a month old or maybe two months old,
if you were appending to a string in a loop,
was it basically extending, reallocating, and copying?
Now, strings were always immutable.
Sorry, yes, it was calculating the size of the result,
allocating a new string object, and then copying
the two originals into that.
There is a string resize internal operation
that is sort of intended to be only used when you're building
up a string before you've shown it to anyone else.
And I needed that because I was envisioning an I/O system
where you say, oh, I'm going to read a line
and I don't know how long that line is going to be,
or maybe I'm going to slurp an entire file
into a single string and I don't know how long that file is.
So I'm allocating a large enough buffer.
I'm reading into that buffer.
And then if it turns out that I allocated 1,000 bytes,
but what I read was only 15 bytes,
I reallocated to give the sort of remaining 85 or whatever,
900 bytes.
Are we talking about your thinking
before you released the very first version of Python,
meaning you didn't like--
at some point, you came back from vacation
and you handed it to somebody at work.
This is your thinking when there's only one person before
even the 0.01--
Oh, yeah, yeah.
I wanted strings to be done that way,
including the little detail that if you
have a string of, say, 10 bytes, you allocate 11 bytes
and you put a no byte at the end,
just so that if you happen to want to pass that string
to a C library function that expected
zero terminated strings, no byte terminated strings,
you wouldn't have to copy it.
There might be a no byte in the middle,
so things might still go wrong.
But if you sort of knew or trusted that that wasn't the case,
you wouldn't have to make a copy with one extra byte
just to make sure that that no byte was there.
The no byte is part of the data structure, only, of course,
visible on the C side.
So for lists, I had a similar idea.
Again, lists in ABC were a tree structure
that was sort of super efficient,
even if you grew a very large list from small ones.
And I thought that tree structure was way too complicated,
so I said, OK, a list is a mutable data structure.
That was sort of a concept that didn't really exist in ABC.
In ABC, everything was immutable.
I thought, well, pragmatically speaking,
I prefer my larger data structures,
meaning lists and dictionaries, to be mutable.
And so the list was--
the implementation was always just a pointer
to a buffer that could be reallocated.
We call it list in Python.
It really is an array that just is an array of pointers.
And each pointer points to an object.
We know how long that array is.
That's in the object header.
And so if there's no room, we reallocate it.
And if we throw something away from the middle,
then we shift everything over, and we also reallocate.
The only improvement that happened
to that data structure in the last, well,
let's say, 34 years is that the original implementation did not
have over allocation.
I was relying on realloc doing some kind of chunking.
So if you realloc something from 1,000 bytes to 1,004 bytes,
I imagine, well, internally, realloc probably
aligns everything in chunks of 16 bytes or more.
And so it's not going to move that memory in that sort of--
eventually, that was shown to be either false or just
inefficient.
You assumed realloc would do it as well as you would have done
it, but eventually, it didn't.
It didn't, yeah.
And so eventually, there are sort of internally,
there are two sizes that are held in the list object header.
One tells you what the length of the array
is of the list is to the Python user,
and the other one tells you how much space there
is in the array, and the second is always larger than the first.
And then--
I'm shocked that it wasn't a linked list.
Oh, really?
Yeah, I'm shocked.
Oh, I'm sorry.
It's named list.
But OK.
Yeah, I know.
I get what you're doing.
So then talk through, as you built the earliest dictionary
structure, what's different between that?
So again, in ABC, dictionaries were trees,
and in the case of dictionaries,
they were kept in sorted order by the key.
The key was always some orderable object.
Well, I think in ABC, everything was comparable.
At least two things of the same type.
So ABC-- and again, I thought that was too complex,
and I had skimmed at least Knuth volume 3, which explains
the concept of hash tables.
And I was familiar with hash tables in Perl,
where I think they're called hashes.
And so I just sort of--
I leafed through the table of contents of Knuth volume 3,
and I picked a hashing algorithm and sort of a hash table
organization that felt right.
And so I chose open hashing instead of sort
of having separate linked lists for buckets.
And the original hash algorithm for strings, at least,
was something-- I don't know if I
picked the hash function out of Knuth also,
but I probably did.
Between Python 3.7 and Python 3.8,
dictionaries kept their order.
Ah.
Like, what happened?
Was it the revenge of ABC?
You know, meaning that trees--
No.
So it's a different kind of order.
In ABC, the keys were sorted.
So if you have numeric keys, if you have the 1, 12, and 500
in your dictionary, in ABC at least,
the keys are ordered 1, 12, 500, or 1, 2, 3, or whatever.
And if you insert 11, it gets inserted between 1 and 12.
On the other hand, in the newer Python dictionaries
that preserve order, it is insertion order.
So it is not made-- because the sort of--
Python dictionaries don't require
that the key type is sortable, is comparable.
It only needs to be hashable.
And so we can-- well, and of course, it needs to be--
you need to have an equality comparison.
Is this string equal to that string?
But you don't need-- you never need to look at,
is this string less than that string?
So what did you do to make it keep insertion order?
So that was in a time when I had long relinquished
or delegated development of most of the basic data types.
I think we had a developer in Japan
who for years had been improving the efficiency
of the dictionary type.
And one of the problems of the original design
with open hashing that I picked from Knuth
is that it's pretty space inefficient.
Because if you have--
let's see if I can reconstruct-- for each key value pair,
you have to have a pointer to the key.
Let's be old-fashioned and say that's four bytes.
You have a pointer to the value.
That's another four bytes.
Then you have the hash, which is another four bytes.
So now the hash table is an array of structs
that are each 12 bytes long.
And for the hash table algorithm to the lookup and insertion
and deletion algorithm to work at all,
you can't have the table be more than 2/3 full.
So that means that if you have an array of 1,000 entries,
you can store at most 600 or 700 key value pairs.
And so you have 300 or 400 times 24 bytes wasted space.
And so our Japanese core dev figured out
a way to have separate tables where the hash table only
contained one thing and the actual key value pairs
and hashes were kept in a table that had no holes in it.
So they were basically kind of growing, filling, remembering.
Everything is remembering where things are laid out.
And so first, he stumbled upon sort of--
I think he refined the algorithm a few times,
having these separate arrays.
And then he stumbled upon the property that, oh, hey,
it happens to preserve insertion order.
In the second table, for sure, right?
Exactly, in the second table.
Because the sort of the table in which you jump around
based on the hash value now just has an index
in into the other table.
And so there is an additional space saving.
Because if your hash table has less than 256 elements,
that array only needs to have one byte for the index.
And so there is like all kinds of cleverness there.
It comes as a surprise to me that you don't do linked lists.
Really?
I could have told you that 10 years ago.
That it doesn't do linked lists.
I mean, I guess, and that has probably
to do with your desire to interoperate the seed kind of
just percolates through about blocks of things
that can be extended and then filled in
seem to be better than generic linked lists.
What I didn't know at the time that that's also
a good architecture for modern hardware,
because you have better cache locality, which is not
a concept that I think I even knew existed in '89.
So I think I just avoided linked lists
because I didn't like them for some other reason.
That's cool.
That's exactly-- well, it's not exactly what I hoped you'd say.
I'd hope you'd do linked lists over and over and over again,
because I just have assumed all my life that linked lists
are the--
linked lists and hash maps and linked lists on top of hash maps
and linked lists, linked lists, linked lists.
Because computer science thinks about linked lists all the time.
There are plenty of pointers in Python,
but sort of the classic linked list is not used much.
[MUSIC PLAYING]